1 
Cthulhu Eternal: An Any-Time Lovecraftian Roleplaying Game 
Cheat Sheet Summary of Changes 
 
 
Localization for Stone Age Settings 
Document Version 1.6   Released 30 August, 2026 
Credits: 
Original Writing: Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, Christopher Smith 
Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O’Neil. 
Additional Writing: Michelle Bernay-Rogers, Paul Franzese. 
Localization of Cthulhu Eternal for the Stone Age Setting: Adam Alexander with John Shimmin 
Rules updates, help and enthusiasm: Noah Cline, Matt Wiseman. 
Copyright © 2026 by Cthulhu Reborn Publishing. 
The name Cthulhu Eternal and the associated logo are Trademarks of Cthulhu Reborn Publishing. 
For full OGL License Details including statements of Product Identity and Open Content see end of document. 
 
 
WHAT THIS FILE IS – AND WHAT IT IS NOT 
The Cthulhu Eternal System is a multi-era, multi-setting ruleset for tabletop roleplaying. At its core it has a streamlined 
set of universal d100-based rules which govern most elements of the game. While these universal rules define the core of 
the game, each era-specific version of the rules (which we call “localizations” of the game) have certain era -specific rules 
and modifications. 
For each such localization, a complete ruleset (or “System Reference Document” on OGL -speak) has been compiled. Such 
localized SRDs reproduce all the universal material that is the core part of Cthulhu Eternal’s game “DNA” inserting specific 
sections into the rules text to deal with the technology, social conventions, or other special things that make the 
era/setting different from others. These extra rules often describe: 
• New skills lists, and sets of protagonist archetypes, 
• Special options for running combat in the setting, 
• Portrayals of mental illness that capture the beliefs and understanding common to the setting,  
• Details of vehicles, poisons, and common diseases of the era, and 
• Any other specific modifications the game designers thought would better capture the setting’s flavor.  
Because an SRD has both the universal rules AND local modifications, each is quite a substantial document (~ 100 pages). 
They are effectively self-contained rulebooks in their own right: someone could run a game using the SRD alone.  
If you are new to the Cthulhu Eternal system, the best place to learn the rules (localized to a specific era/setting) is with 
one of the SRDs. However, once you’ve learned one localization the system and have a need to familiarize yourself with 
another, reading through the entire SRD for the new setting is overkill. Most of the rules are similar – what you really 
want to know is “what’s different about this new localization?”  
That’s exactly what this “Cheat Sheet” is designed to provide you – just the new stuff for a localization. Coupled with your 
general understanding of the game, this information will get you going quickly. This document definitely is NOT a full 
rulebook. Also, some minor era-specific details might not get noted here: for those you should refer back to the full 
details in the SRD (which this document also points to in some places).  

2 
Protagonists 
The table below shows the set of skills available to Protagonists in Stone Age games. The table also shows the base 
ratings for each skill, and which can be specialized. The descriptions of each skill may be found on page 9. 
Adversity Skills: if your Protagonist gets additional skill picks for enduring an especially harsh upbringing, they can only 
spend those picks on Carouse, First Aid, Other Tribe, or Scavenge. 
>> Skills and Base Ratings 
Alertness (20) 
Animal Handling (10) 
Appraise (10) 
Art (Type) (0) 
Athletics (30) 
Augury (0) 
Beguile (20) 
Boatbuilding (10) 
Boating (0) 
Carouse (0) 
Craft (Type) (0) 
Disguise/Mimic (10) 
Dodge (30) 
First Aid (10) 
Folklore (10) 
Forage/Hunt (10) 
Foreign Tongue (Type) (0) 
Harangue/Taunt (10) 
Healing (0) 
Herb Lore (20) 
Homeland (0) 
Inscriptions (0) 
Insight (10) 
Make Fire (20) 
Melee Weapons (30) 
Mysticism (Type) (10) 
Navigate (10) 
Oral Tradition (10) 
Other Tribe (0) 
Persuade (20) 
Poisons (0) 
Ranged Weapons (20) 
Reassure (10) 
Repair/Devise (0) 
Ride (10) 
Scavenge (10) 
Search (20) 
Spirit World (10) 
Stealth (10) 
Swim (20) 
Track (10) 
Unarmed Combat (40) 
Unnatural (0) 
Weather & Season (20) 
 
Archetypes 
>> A Note on Written Language 
The advent of writing in Stone Age settings is a miniscule slice of time. The earliest known written language dates 
to 3200 BCE and even then, few would know how to read and write. The limited (or non-existent) education 
opportunities available to most individuals means that only a relatively small percentage of people are literate. 
Such skills are usually limited to professions which routinely involve reading or writing documents. Being illiterate 
doesn’t mean you can’t communicate verbally – but it does make it difficult or impossible to understand any 
information encountered in written form. 
In game terms, literacy is represented by the Protagonist’s rating in the Inscriptions skill (described in the skill 
listings). By default, this skill begins at zero, although some archetypes furnish the Protagonist with a higher 
starting value – these apply only when playing games set later than 3200 BCE (if playing games in earlier times, 
take the skill points for Inscriptions and reallocate them to any other skill of your choosing except Unnatural). You 
can choose to reserve some bonus skill picks to invest in boosting the Inscription skill regardless of whether it is 
part of the Archetype list or not (although it only makes sense in an era where writing exists).  
An Inscriptions skill rating of 40% or more would indicate a good level of basic proficiency with the local forms of 
carved or painted writing. 

3 
The following archetypes are available for Protagonists in Stone Age games. 
List of Archetypes 
The following Archetypes are appropriate for games of Lovecraftian investigation set in Stone Age settings. Archetypes 
represent the roles that Protagonists fulfill in society. An archetype could represent the life a character had before they 
were drawn into investigating cosmic horror. Or it could represent the role they still try to maintain to the best of their 
ability while the horrors slowly erode everything they thought they understood.  
Each archetype has a collection of skills that represent knowledge areas the Protagonist uses in their daily lives.  
This list doesn’t cover every possible character type but focus on likely protagonists in mystery and investigation tales. 
The GM is encouraged to develop other archetypes to cover other character types suggested by players. Guidelines for 
developing new Archetypes may be found in the SRD. 
Herbalist 
RECOMMENDED STATS: INT 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• First Aid 70% 
• Folklore 50% 
• Forage/Hunt 50% 
• Healing 70% 
• Herb Lore 60% 
• Make Fire 60% 
• Poisons 50% 
• Search 50% 
Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have: 
• Alertness 60% 
• Beguile 60% 
• Inscriptions 40% 
• Insight 50% 
• Persuade 60% 
• Reassure 50% 
• Scavenge 50% 
• Weather/Seasons 60% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 5, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 2 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Hunter / Farmer / Forager 
RECOMMENDED STATS: DEX, STR 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Animal Handling 50% 
• Athletics 70% 

4 
• Craft (Traps, Snares, etc.) 60% 
• Forage/Hunt 50% 
• Ranged Weapons 60% 
• Repair/Devise 40% 
• Ride 40% 
Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have: 
• Carouse 40% 
• First Aid 50% 
• Herb Lore 60% 
• Homeland 40% 
• Melee Weapons 70% 
• Navigate 50% 
• Search 60% 
• Track 50% 
• Weather/Seasons 60% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 4, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 4 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Leader / Elder 
RECOMMENDED STATS: CHA, STR 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Carouse 40% 
• Forage/Hunt 40% 
• Harangue/Taunt 50% 
• Homeland 60% 
• Inscriptions 30% 
• Insight 40% 
• Make Fire 50% 
• Melee Weapons 50% 
• Spirit World 50% 
Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have: 
• Boatbuilding 50% 
• Dodge 70% 
• First Aid 50% 
• Foreign Tongue (Type) 40% 
• Oral Tradition 50% 
• Other Tribe (Type) 40% 
• Poisons 40% 
• Ranged Weapons 60% 
• Ride 50% 

5 
STARTING RESOURCES: 5, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 3 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process. If Protagonist is from an 
agricultural lifestyle, one of their bonds will be a Community Bond with a starting score of 12] 
Scout / Pathfinder 
RECOMMENDED STATS: DEX, STR 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Athletics 60% 
• Forage/Hunt 70% 
• Make Fire 50% 
• Navigate 60% 
• Other Tribe (Type) 50% 
• Ride 60% 
• Search 50% 
• Track 50% 
• Weather/Seasons 60% 
Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have: 
• Alertness 60% 
• Animal Handling 50% 
• Beguile 60% 
• Boatbuilding 50% 
• Boating 40% 
• Folklore 50% 
• Foreign Tongue (Type) 40% 
• Inscriptions 40% 
• Repair/Devise 40% 
• Scavenge 50% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 4, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 2 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Shaman / Mystic 
RECOMMENDED STATS: INT 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Augury 50% 
• Insight 60% 
• Mysticism (Type) 70% 
• Oral Tradition 60% 

6 
• Reassure 60% 
• Spirit World 70% 
• Weather/Seasons 60% 
Choose any 1 of these that you don't already have: 
• Alertness 60% 
• Beguile 60% 
• Foreign Tongue (Type) 40% 
• Herb Lore 60% 
• Inscriptions 40% 
• Make Fire 60% 
• Mysticism (Type) 50% 
• Other Tribe (Type) 40% 
• Persuade 60% 
• Poisons 40% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 5, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 3 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Storyteller 
RECOMMENDED STATS: POW, CHA 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Art (Storytelling, Acting, etc.) 70% 
• Beguile 60% 
• Folklore 60% 
• Inscriptions 40% 
• Insight 50% 
• Oral Tradition 70% 
• Persuade 60% 
• Spirit World 50% 
Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have: 
• Augury 40% 
• Carouse 40% 
• Disguise/Mimic 50% 
• Foreign Tongue (Type) 40% 
• Harangue/Taunt 50% 
• Homeland 40% 
• Mysticism (Type) 50% 
• Reassure 50% 

7 
STARTING RESOURCES: 3, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 3 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Thief / Outcast 
RECOMMENDED STATS: DEX, CHA 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Alertness 50% 
• Appraise 40% 
• Folklore 40% 
• Forage/Hunt 50% 
• Insight 50% 
• Make Fire 40% 
• Persuade 60% 
• Scavenge 40% 
• Stealth 60% 
• Unarmed Combat 60% 
Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have: 
• Art (Type) 40% 
• Athletics 70% 
• Beguile 60% 
• Carouse 40% 
• Disguise/Mimic 50% 
• Harangue/Taunt 50% 
• Melee Weapons 70% 
• Poisons 40% 
• Search 60% 
• Weather/Seasons 60% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 2, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 5 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Warrior 
RECOMMENDED STATS: STR, DEX 
ARCHETYPAL SKILLS: 
• Athletics 70% 
• Carouse 50% 
• Craft (Type) or Boatbuilding 50% 
• Forage/Hunt 50% 

8 
• Homeland or Boating 50% 
• Melee Weapons 70% 
• Repair/Devise 40% 
• Track 50% 
• Unarmed Combat 70% 
Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have: 
• Animal Handling 50% 
• Craft (Type) 50% 
• Dodge 70% 
• First Aid 50% 
• Harangue/Taunt 50% 
• Make Fire 60% 
• Navigate 50% 
• Poisons 40% 
• Ranged Weapons 60% 
• Scavenge 50% 
STARTING RESOURCES: 3, if Protagonist is from an agricultural lifestyle; for hunter/gatherers the starting resources is 
the resources rating of the clan/tribe in which they live (or 0 if they have been cast out of their group) 
BONDS: 4 [if Protagonist is from a hunter/gatherer lifestyle one of these will automatically be a Community Bond to the 
clan/tribe with strength CHA+2, the remaining bonds allocated using the standard process] 
Income and Access to Resources 
Unlike other Cthulhu Eternal eras, Protagonists may either be part of a Hunter/Gatherer lifestyle (everyone in the 
Paleolithic, some in the Mesolithic, and a few outsiders in the Neolithic), or they may be from an Agricultural society. In 
the former case, their access to resources is mostly determined by the prosperity of their clan/tribal group and their 
Resources score (0-20) reflects the communal “wealth” of their community, shared with all other community members. 
Conversely, agricultural lifestyle Protagonists have personal belongings, and their Resources score reflects their own 
personal prosperity. 
Resources  Clan/Tribe (in a hunter/gatherer) Personal wealth (agricultural) 
0 Community is starving. Weak and old individuals 
routinely die of starvation. Even healthy 
individuals are at temporary -2 CON for tests. 
Individual own no items of value or function. 
Penury. Near starvation. 
1-4 Community is struggling to survive, having barely 
enough food and resources to keep everyone 
alive. Everyone is temporarily at -1 CON for tests. 
Individual owns only basic and valueless items; 
barely enough to eke out a basic life. Always 
hungry. 
5-8 Community is not as well fed as anyone would 
prefer, but nobody is starving. Equipment is 
serviceable if old and worn-out. 
Individual owns a sparse personal collection of 
valuable or useful items, some in terrible 
condition. Sometimes hungry. 
9-12 Community is at a comfortable level of food and 
resources. 
Individual owns a modest personal cache of 
valuable, useful items. Usually has basic food. 
13-16 Community is mildly prosperous, having access 
to good food with little worry of it running out. 
Individual owns a fair personal stock of simple 
items. Occasional access to superior food. 
17-18 Community is well resourced with everyone 
having their pick of food and items without 
anyone missing out. 
Individual owns an impressive personal 
collection of useful gear; considered wealthy / 
well-resourced. Regular access to superior food 

9 
19 Community is very well resourced with its 
supplies of food and equipment being the envy 
of most similar groups nearby. 
Individual is the envy of most people; personally 
owns numerous sought-after items of impressive 
function. Access to the best food and beverages. 
20+ Community has benefited from a windfall of 
food or resources which has made life 
exceptionally easy and comfortable for 
everyone. 
Individual has access to unparalleled quantities 
of valuable/useful items. A stockpile of personal 
wealth. Choice of available food, in any quantity. 
 
Skills 
Alertness 
Base Rating: 20% 
Alertness detects danger. Use it to hear a safety being weapon being readied, to understand the mumbling on the other 
side of a wall, to spot a concealed item hidden under a jacket, or to catch someone who is trying to escape notice using 
Stealth. 
Animal Handling 
Base Rating: 10% 
Animals are an important part of daily life in the Stone Age, whether the earliest domesticated canines, or later with the 
advent of animal husbandry. Everyone has a basic understanding of caring for and trying to control animals. Animal 
handling can be used to calm frightened sheep, or perhaps to train a dog to hunt or guard. 
Animal handling can’t be used by a rider to control a mount. That’s the Ride skill. 
Appraise 
Base Rating: 10% 
The ability to quickly determine the true (intrinsic) value of an item. This is an important skill in ensuring that bartering 
exchange deals are favorable to you. It is also helpful in knowing what items or resources others might be willing to 
trade to obtain. 
Art (Type) 
Base Rating: 0% 
Expertise at creating or performing a work that sways emotions and opinions. It also encompasses knowledge of 
techniques and trends in your field, and the ability tell a particular creator’s real work from a fake. Anyone can draw a 
rough sketch; the Art skill reflects knowledge, practice, and talent. Each type of Art is a separate skill: Carving, Dance, 
Singing, Painting, Sculpture, etc. 
Athletics 
Base Rating: 30% 
Your Protagonist trains to get the most out of his or her strength and agility. Strength and Dexterity cover raw physical 
power and manual dexterity; the Athletics skill represents long practice doing things like running, jumping, climbing, and 
throwing. 
Use Athletics to: 
• Outrun someone (see OPPOSED TESTS in the SRD). 
• Jump an intimidating gap. 
• Climb in a crisis. 
• Land safely in a fall of up to three yards. 

10 
• Hit a target with a thrown rock or put a thrown trap exactly on target. 
• Catch something without warning, such as intercepting a thrown rock or trap. 
Augury 
Base Rating: 0% 
This skill measures knowledge of one or more of the known methods of fortune-telling used to predict the future, 
whether it be through watching the flight patterns of birds, reading entrails, or watching the movements of the planets 
amongst the stars. Usually, these techniques require multiple observation over several days before yielding some 
prediction – and it is often relatively vague. It is the Game Moderator’s decision as to whether the prediction is accurate 
or not, but in either case many (superstitious) people around the Protagonist will firmly believe that the foretold future 
will come to pass. They might even generously interpret the real events in a way that makes the prediction at least 
partially correct. For accurate and specific visions of the future, some form of ritual magic must be involved (which is 
well beyond the remit of this skill).  
Beguile 
Base Rating: 20% 
In the Stone Age, oftentimes the best way to convince someone to do what you want them to do, is by appealing to 
their sense of power or self-importance. This delicate art combines guile, cunning, “buttering-up”, or other such subtle 
techniques to curry favor and obtain leverage. 
Beguiling is not about open threats, teasing, or aggressive bluster – that is covered by the Harangue/Taunt skill. Nor is it 
about using cold logic to convince them (that’s Persuade). Rather, this skill is about using wile and cunning, coupled with 
a detailed understanding of the authority and power wielded by the person, to gain advantage. 
If the target of the skill starts from an antagonistic viewpoint, some form of OPPOSED TEST will probably be needed to 
overcome their negative impression.  
Boatbuilding 
Base Rating: 10% 
The knowledge required to design a waterborne vessel that will stay afloat in the prevailing conditions it is designed for. 
While most of the work to actually build a boat will fall under Craft skill specializations, Boatbuilding is required to 
supply the direction of this effort to ensure the end result actually works as intended. 
This skill also encompasses a general understanding of the boatbuilding techniques employed by different societies and 
cultures, and may prove helpful in identifying the origins of a vessel.  
Boating 
Base Rating: 0% 
Operating and navigating waterborne vehicles. Use it to keep a boat safe in a crisis, such as through a storm or in a 
dangerous pursuit. 
Carouse 
Base Rating: 0% 
People have a variety of ways of reveling and relaxing when the work-day is through. This skill combines a knowledge of 
such social distractions and indulgences, and a practiced skill in partaking – and perhaps excelling – in their practice. 
Use it to know the particular forms of entertainments that certain classes of society are likely to crave, and the people 
and places who are able to satisfy them – whether legally or otherwise. 

11 
When participating in a leisure activity, this skill can be called upon when endurance or skillful practice of the revelry 
would achieve an advantage. One such use might be retaining one’s faculties even when imbibing excessive intoxicating 
drinks. Another might be winning at games of chance commonly used for wagering (in this case, the skill is likely to be 
part of an OPPOSED TEST against other players’ Carouse, with sly attempts at cheating covered by the Stealth skill). 
Craft (Type) 
Base Rating: 0% 
Making and repairing sophisticated tools and structures. A job that most people could figure out does not require the 
Craft skill, only an INT or DEX test. Use Craft for specialized work that needs training: Craft (Woodworking) to get carve a 
water-tight hull — or to sabotage one beyond repair; Craft (Textiles) to weave threads into fabric, and so on.   
The Game Moderator decides whether a task requires Craft. Each Craft type is a separate skill: Weapon-making, 
Woodworking, Farmer, Rat-Catcher, etc. 
Disguise/Mimic 
Base Rating: 10% 
Alter your Protagonist’s appearance, voice, posture, body language, and mannerisms to avoid recognition without 
drawing attention, or to move in a way that impersonates the motions and sounds created by an animal. The latter is an 
important skill for stalking game; successful use can add a +20% to any Forage/Hunt check (+40% on a critical result), 
but woe betide anyone who attempts such a move close to deadly predators and fumbles the test. 
Dodge 
Base Rating: 30% 
Evading danger through instinct and reflexes. Use Dodge to avoid an attack. Against ranged weapons and explosions, 
Dodge is only useful to get to cover (see DODGING RANGED ATTACKS in the SRD). 
First Aid 
Base Rating: 10% 
The initial treatment and stabilization of injuries. Use it to help a character recover lost Hit Points. By comparison, 
Healing corrects a severe wound and helps ensures long-term treatment and recovery. (See HEALING in the SRD) 
Folklore 
Base Rating: 10% 
Folklore is the knowledge of the customs and lore of the common people of region. It is used to deduce the proper way 
to enter a cave, whether to walk around the field widdershins prior to planting winter wheat, or in what order to 
propitiate the ancestors. It’s also useful when trying to understand the myths and legends of region, such as what 
creature is said to live in the lake or why the eastern face of the mountain has no trees. 
Forage/Hunt 
Base Rating: 10% 
Forage/Hunt is used to find edible food in the wilderness. The appropriate tools are required, such a club, spear, or 
other weapon to hunt animals. It also covers dressing the prey and preparing it for storage. 
A successful roll provides enough food for a group of four to eat for a week. 
Foreign Tongue (Type) 
Base Rating: 0% 
Ability to communicate using the verbal systems employed by another culture or group, whether languages or simple 
patterns of speech. Each foreign tongue is a distinct skill. Having 20% allows halting conversations; at 50% your 

12 
Protagonist speaks like a native. The greater the skill, the greater the complexity of the information your Protagonist 
comprehends and the less time it takes. You don’t need to roll a Foreign Tongue skill unless the Game Moderator says 
the situation is exceptionally difficult. 
Being able to speak a foreign tongue doesn’t mean you can read or write text in that language (rare skills which few 
learn in this era). Attempts to do that are determined by the Inscriptions skill. The Game Moderator might require 
separate rolls against both skills or a single roll applied across both tests, depending on the situation. 
Harangue/Taunt 
Base Rating: 10% 
The art of either browbeating someone into agreeing with your point of view, or of enraging them to the point where 
they will lose control and act in an undisciplined way that is advantageous to you. 
This technique is not a subtle attempt to convince someone through a well-reasoned argument (that’s Persuade). Nor is 
it a tempt to appeal to their sense of power and importance (that’s Beguile). Instead, Harangue/Taunt is all about 
bluster, shouting, and threats. But sometimes these can be more successful than other techniques, although the 
individuals on the receiving end are unlikely to enjoy the interaction quite so much. 
Taunting is a related discipline, namely an attempt to insult or belittle verbal opponents to the point where they lose 
their temper and say or do something rash (which they will usually later regret). In some cultures, this is a well-
established way of winning an argument or establishing superiority in the minds of the community. 
Healing 
Base Rating: 0% 
Knowledge of curative preparations, which in this era are a combination of herbal and traditional concoctions for 
ingestion, and poultices which could be applied to wounds. Use this skill to identify a common healing preparation, 
know what preparation is likely to improve a particular complaint, and safely administer a preparation. 
This skill is primarily concerned with the long-term healing of injuries, diseases, or poisonings. For quick stabilization of 
injuries in the field, the First Aid skill is more useful. 
Identifying a healing preparation or medicinal herb requires at least 20% skill; finding places where such ingredients may 
grow naturally will likely require use of the Herb Lore skill. Preparing a particularly powerful treatment safely, such as 
one with psychoactive effects, requires at least 40% skill or a successful roll. Misusing Healing is a quick way to kill a 
patient (see POISON AND DISEASE in the SRD). 
Herb Lore 
Base Rating: 20% 
Herb Lore is an understanding of herbs, the proper method to collect them, where to find them, when to find them, and 
what can be done with them.  
This skill doesn’t include the processes required to turn herbs into poultices or salves (that’s part of the Healing skill), 
nor does it instruct someone in creating Poisons from herbs (that’s the Poisons skill). 
Homeland 
Base Rating: 0% 
Homeland represents a protagonist’s general knowledge about their homeland. Who’s in charge, basic geography, 
known power struggles, which chieftain runs a certain community, etc.  
History, Folklore, and other more specific skills should be used to gain in-depth knowledge. 

13 
Inscriptions 
Base Rating: 0% 
Written forms of language (pictograms etc.) are rarely employed, and few people are trained in creating or interpreting 
such inscriptions. Such markings are usually only used to leave permanent accounts of the deeds of the high and mighty. 
If you want your Protagonist to be able to interpret or create written inscriptions, he or she will need to have at least a 
basic rating in this skill. As a shorthand, anyone with an Inscriptions skill below 10 is unable to make any sense of written 
symbols; a skill rating between 11 and 40 represents a limited degree of understanding; a rating above 40 denotes a full 
understanding of systems of writing. 
The skill does not need to be purchased separately for each of the languages known; it is assumed that the basics of 
reading and writing common writing systems does not need to be re-learned. Note that in many cases where an 
inscription written in a foreign language needs to be comprehended, this will likely involve skill tests of BOTH 
Inscriptions and the requisite Foreign Tongue skill. It is the GM’s discretion as to whether tests should involve a single 
die roll compared to both skills, or separate rolls against each. 
Insight 
Base Rating: 10% 
Insight obtains information about a person — especially information the subject would rather conceal — through 
observation, conversation, or examining patterns of behavior and relationships. Use Insight to recognize signs of 
dishonesty from verbal cues and body language, gauge attitude and intentions, cultivate sources of information about a 
subject, determine what it would take to get a subject to cooperate, or recognize clues of what a subject wants to 
conceal.  
Insight can notice signs of mental illness but Reassure would be needed to assist with a specific malady. A subject who 
deliberately tries to deceive your Protagonist can attempt an opposed test comparing their Persuade against your 
Protagonist’s Insight (see OPPOSED TESTS in the SRD). 
Make Fire 
Base Rating: 0% 
Fire is essential to life in the Stone Age – it is how people stave off the cold winters, and how they cook food to ensure it 
is safe to eat. Everyone learns the basics of how to make fire via whichever methods are known to the local community 
(it could be via striking flint on stone, or by rapidly rotating a wooden rod in a palette loaded with dry leaves). When 
conditions are amenable and time is plentiful, no skill test is required to start a small fire. However, if there is a strong 
breeze, or it is raining, or if the fire needs to be started quickly (say, before a beast descends on the settlement) the GM 
will likely ask for a test. 
Melee Weapons 
Base Rating: 30% 
Lethal use of melee weapons in combat. Use it to hurt or kill an opponent with a knife, axe, club, or other hand-held 
weapon. 
Mysticism (Type) 
Base Rating: 10% 
The study of the supernatural as understood by human traditions, including things like magic, initiation into mystery 
cults, and secret societies. Use Mysticism to examine and deduce the intent of a ritual, or to identify occult traditions, 
groups, scrolls, tools, symbols, or legends. Mysticism can never tell a Protagonist what’s genuinely unnatural and what’s 
just superstition or mythology. That’s the province of the Unnatural skill. 

14 
Mysticism is the more religious counterpart to Folklore. Successful Folklore and Mysticism rolls could provide the same 
information, viewed through different filters. 
Navigate 
Base Rating: 10% 
Finding your way quickly from memory, directions, orienteering, or the stars. 
Oral Tradition 
Base Rating: 10% 
In this era, most of the lore and wisdom about the world and events that have happened in the past are transmitted by 
oral accounts memorized and repeated down the generations. To us today this seems like an unreliable and imprecise 
way to record important information, but in early historical times it was the normal method – and wise individuals were 
able to train their memories to hold vast amounts of detail and recall it at a moment’s notice (certainly much more than 
we can today).  
This skill reflects the breadth and depth of the knowledge that your Protagonist has received in their life to date, and 
buried away inside their ‘memory palace’ for later retrieval. It can be used as a kind of general research skill, or a 
measure of the Protagonist’s general knowledge. 
Oral Tradition covers routine and well-established general knowledge about how the world really works, local taboos, 
and what happened in times still remembered. More specialized understanding of common spiritual beliefs is the 
domain of the Spirit World skill, esoteric lore is the province of the Mysticism skill, and fantastic tales about mythical 
creatures is covered by Folklore. Similarly, knowledge about the geography and politics of one’s own people is covered 
by Homeland, and the equivalent details about a foreign group is captured by the Other Tribe skill. Knowledge about the 
patterns of the seasons and weather is covered by the Weather/Seasons skill instead. 
Other Tribe (Type) 
Base Rating: 0% 
This skill represents a deep understanding of the people, places, and common practices that are unique to a group of 
people that live outside the Protagonist’s normal community. Use it to recall details of the local climate, local peoples, 
history, and local government arrangement. It can also cover quirky beliefs or discoveries that have come to be common 
knowledge among members of the group. 
Persuade 
Base Rating: 20% 
Changing another’s deeply held decision or desire. Use Persuade to get your Protagonist’s way when the subject is so 
stubborn, what your Protagonist wants is so valuable, or the deception is so flagrant that Charisma isn’t enough.  
With Persuade, your Protagonist might convince a witness that what she saw was innocuous and not unnatural, talk a 
community leader into helping you cover up an outbreak to avoid a mass panic, or draw useful information out of an 
unwilling subject. This skill also allows your Protagonist to resist persuasion and interrogation in opposed Persuade rolls 
(see OPPOSED TESTS in the SRD). 
Poisons 
Base Rating: 0% 
The use of toxic preparations is common practice in the Stone Age world whether it be to silence a political rival, commit 
a murder, or rid a woman of an unwanted pregnancy. In most cases the use of poisons is appealing because it is much 
harder to trace, and may even appear to be the results of natural causes. Not all poisonings are intended to kill. 

15 
This skill includes the knowledge to prepare poisons from commonly available ingredients, the ability to detect the tell-
tale signs that something bears the taint of a known poison, and the knowledge of the distinctive signs that poisons 
leave on their victims (often on their corpses). 
All ingredients for Stone Age poisons are plants which grow naturally. This skill doesn’t help with knowing where to find 
such plants in the wild (that would be Forage/Hunt) or whether other types of similar plants could be substituted if they 
are unavailable (that would be Herb Lore). 
Ranged Weapons 
Base Rating: 20% 
The ability to accurately hit targets with ranged weapons such as Bows, Blow-guns and Slings. 
This skill isn’t used for thrown weapons like Spears – those make use of the Athletics skill instead. 
Reassure 
Base Rating: 10% 
Use this skill to understand the mental illness afflicting a person, help an afflicted person along the journey back to 
sanity, or talk someone down when the mental illness threatens to take hold. 
You can also use this skill to assist in social interactions with someone, to calm them from an agitated state in order to 
extract information from them. 
You cannot use Reassure on yourself.  
Using Reassure to aid someone who suffered exposure to Unnatural forces might cost the reassuring Survivor SAN; see 
THREATS TO SAN in the SRD. 
Repair/Devise 
Base Rating: 0% 
With many settlements isolated by a day or more journey from each other, self-reliance is key. The ability to repair 
broken equipment or create impromptu fixes for unexpected breakages is vital. 
Repair/Devise is not a craft skilled. It’s designed to make some work just long enough to get the job done (hopefully). 
Many other Cthulhu Eternal settings use Craft (Jury-Rig). Repair/Devise takes the place of that in this setting. 
Ride 
Base Rating: 10% 
Handling, training, and riding an animal—horses, donkeys, camels, whatever. Use it to keep safe on an animal in a crisis 
and to keep riding animals safe, calm, and healthy. 
Scavenge 
Base Rating: 10% 
The world is full of useful items, although most people don’t know where to go looking for the good stuff. Use this skill 
to find and salvage helpful pieces of equipment or locate valuable resources like food and water. Anyone can find items 
in places where they are likely to be found (e.g., food in a larder); use this skill to find things in places where nobody else 
would think to look. 
Depending on the game setting and the scarcity of the item being sought, the difficulty of Scavenge tests and the quality 
of the items unearthed by successful rolls may vary. See SCROUNGING in the SRD. 
Note that efforts to rummage for information rather than items is handled by social or knowledge skills instead. 

16 
Search 
Base Rating: 20% 
Finding things that are concealed or obscured from plain sight. Searching an abandoned dwelling may not require the 
Search skill, only time and effort, or a sufficiently high INT. Use Search to find an object that was hidden with the Stealth 
skill or is otherwise so well hidden or disguised that it needs an expert. The Game Moderator may roll the Search 
attempt, so you don’t know whether your Protagonist succeeded or failed. 
Spirit World 
Base Rating: 10% 
Peoples in the Stone Age world know that many of the major processes and events of the natural world are, in fact, 
governed by a host of powerful spirits beings. Some may call them ‘gods’, others might see spirits as beings intimately 
tied to the very land itself. Others might consider the spirits of long-dead ancestors to be important players in the 
world’s events. All sensible people understand that it is important to offer devotion or material sacrifice to one or more 
of these spirit beings, in order to maintain their favor. 
This skill encompasses knowledge of the spirit beings that are commonly venerated by your Protagonist’s community. Its 
coverage is limited to mainstream beliefs – esoteric or hidden knowledge is more in the realms of the Mysticism skill, 
and curious tales about beings who are not recognized by the local worship are covered by the Folklore skill. The 
interpretations of omens or portents is Augury. 
Stealth 
Base Rating: 10% 
Concealing your presence or activities. Use it to hide a weapon, camouflage a position, conceal a mystical carving, pick a 
pocket, move silently, follow without being seen, or blend into a crowd. A Protagonist attempting Stealth can be 
detected only by an opposing Alertness or Search skill (see OPPOSED TESTS in the SRD). 
Swim 
Base Rating: 20% 
Most Protagonists can swim for leisure. Use the Swim skill in a dangerous crisis: going a long distance in choppy water, 
keeping a friend from drowning, or getting to a boat before the tentacled thing below grabs you. 
Track 
Base Rating: 10% 
Use this to locate the tracks of a specific creature or person and follow them. A test must be made to locate the trail and 
then again once every ten minutes they are being followed. Penalties or bonuses may apply depending on how long it 
was since the tracks were made, what the ground is like, what the weather conditions have been since the tracks were 
made, etc. 
Unarmed Combat 
Base Rating: 40% 
Self-defense. A fight between untrained combatants often involves more shoving and shouting than real violence. Use 
Unarmed Combat to hurt or kill an opponent with your Protagonist’s bare hands (or feet, elbows, teeth, or head). 
Unnatural 
Base Rating: 0% 
Knowledge of the fundamental, mind-shattering secrets of the universe. The things that slithered in the dark corners of 
the world and the cosmos beyond. Use it to remember, recognize, or research facts about the things humans consider 

17 
unnatural. This goes far beyond the occult, because the Unnatural skill represents things that are real. Use it to sift 
through the darkest parts of myth and folklore and recognize which of it is true.  
Weather/Seasons 
Base Rating: 20% 
Knowledge of the patterns of the seasons and the best time to plant crops and reap, to make best use of the sun and 
rain. The skill also covers the day-to-day prediction of the weather, based on a combination of observation, established 
folk wisdom, and intuition. 
 
Bonds 
For Protagonists with a hunter/gatherer lifestyle, the bond to their local clan/tribe is an especially important Community 
Bond and its rating directly determines their place in the society and, to an extent, their access to resources. Losing such 
a bond means banishment as an outcast, which is potentially life-threatening. 
 

18 
Combat 
The basic mechanics of combat do not vary much between different localizations of Cthulhu Eternal, but each has its 
own tables of weapons and armor as well as elaborations which cover unique forms of conflict or weapons technology. 
Attack Skills 
For games in Stone Age settings, the following skills are used for combat attacks: 
• Use Ranged Weapons for aimed weapons (e.g., bow or sling); 
• Use Athletics for a thrown weapon; 
• Use Melee Weapons for a hand-to-hand weapon; 
• Use Unarmed Combat for a punch or kick. 
Weapons for Stone Age settings 
Table of Example Weapons 
The tables below summarize some representative weapons and vehicles that characters might have access to. Note that 
while the concept of LETHAL DAMAGE still exists, it is primarily applied to large-scale natural (or supernatural) events 
like lightning strikes, avalanches, or devastating attacks from Mythos entities. 
Thrown weapons use Athletics as a combat skill. 
>> Melee Weapons 
Sample Weapons Damage 
Bare hands and feet  1D4–1* 
Stone knife 1D4* 
Club  1D4 +1* 
Light axe or short spear 1D6+1* 
Heavy stone axe, other crushing weapons 1D8-1* 
Long spear 1D8* 
*Damage bonus is added for this weapon 
 
>> Ranged Weapons 
Sample Weapons Skill Damage Base Range 
Sling Ranged Weapons 1D4 30 yards 
Short Bow and arrow ** Ranged Weapons 1D4+1 150 yards 
Thrown Rock Athletics 1D4–1* STR×5 feet 
Thrown Knife Athletics  1D4* STR×5 feet 
Thrown Axe or Boomerang Athletics 1D6* STR×5 feet 
Thrown Spear, Short or Javelin Athletics 1D6+1* STR×5 yards 
Thrown Spear, Long Athletics 1D8+1* STR×4 yards 
*Damage bonus is added for this weapon 
** The first use of the bow and arrow dates to approximately 60,000-72,000 years ago in Africa and 48,000-52,000 years 
ago in Europe and Asia. 
Armor for Stone Age settings 
Armor Armor Rating 
Heavy cloth, winter clothes, furs 1 
Hardened leather 2 
Wooden wall, palisade, or thick door 5 
Thick stone/brick wall or moderate rock 10  
Reinforced stone/brick wall or thick rock 15 

19 
 
Shield Type* # Free Parries 
Improvised 1 
Small 2 
* The earliest shields date to the late Neolithic Age 
Healing in Stone Age settings 
A healer can attempt a Healing or Herb Lore test once per week: Healing for critical care of severe wounds; Herb Lore for 
poison, disease, and ongoing healing. If treatment succeeds, the patient recovers 1D4 HP. This is doubled with a critical, 
while a fumble inflicts 1D4 HP damage. At the Game Moderator’s discretion, having worn-out tools or poor quality 
medicinal preparations/ingredients may incur a penalty. 
Poisons and Diseases 
The rules governing the damage inflicted by poisons and diseases don’t vary between localizations, but the specific list of 
available toxins and infections is guided by the technology and scientific knowledge prevalent in the setting. The table 
below gives some examples to augment the basic list of common, naturally-occurring poisons. 
 
>> Manufactured & Natural Poisons 
Poison Entry Route Speed Lethality Symptoms Antidote? 
Belladonna Ingestion 30+1D20 minutes 8% Dilated pupils, low 
heartrate & pulse, 
hallucinations 
No 
Cyanide / Laurel Inhalation or 
Ingestion 
1D6 turns 20% Asphyxiation No, but some 
treatments 
Hemlock Ingestion 30+1D20 minutes 6% Convulsions, 
muscle pain 
No 
Monkshood/Wolfsbane Ingestion 30+1D20 minutes 7% Numbness, 
nausea, slow 
heartrate & pulse 
No 
 
>> Sample Diseases 
Disease Route Speed CON Test 
Penalty 
Damage Symptoms Cure 
Ague (Malaria) Insect bite 3D6+10 days None 1D6 Fever & chills No 
Black Plague  Flea bite 
(bubonic 
plague), 
inhalation 
(pneumonic 
plague) 
1D6 days None 1D6 Fever, chills, 
lymph node 
swelling, 
coughing (if 
pneumonic), 
shock 
No 
Bloody Flux / 
Parasitic Worms / 
Snail Fever 
Bad hygiene, 
bad water 
1D6 weeks None 1D3 Diarrhea and 
bleeding  
No 
Consumption Inhaling 
cough 
droplets 
1D6 days None 1D4 Persistent 
cough, night 
sweats 
No 
Dropsy Bacteria, 
exposure by 
contact 
3+1D6 months None 1D3 Skin lesions, 
weakness, 
blindness 
No 
The Fever Insect bite 3D6+10 days None 1D6 Fever & chills No 

20 
The Pox Exposure to 
infected 
person 
2D6 days –40 1D6 Fever, 
vomiting, 
ulcers, rashes, 
scabs 
No 
Spotted Fever Fleas, lice, or 
mites 
1D6+6 days None 1D4 Headache, 
fever, chills 
No 
Yellow Eyes Virus, 
parasite, 
alcoholism 
2D4 weeks None 1D3 Yellow skin, 
loss of appetite 
No 
 
>> Damage from Torture 
If a Protagonist is beaten, whipped, or subject to another type of physical torture, he or she is required to make a 
CON×3 test. The damage accrued from the experience depends on the level of success or failure of this roll: 
• Critical Success: 1D10 HP damage for the whole session, no matter how brutal. 
• Success by 20 or more: 1D3 damage for every 50 strikes (or equivalent). 
• Regular Success: Lethality 3% for every 50 strikes (i.e., 3% for 50 strikes, 6% for 100 strikes, and so on). 
• Failure: Lethality 2% for every 20 strikes. 
• Fumble: 1D20+5 HP damage for the torture with any torture over 50 strikes results in immediate death. 
Torture also takes a toll on the mental health of both torturer and victim. The torturer must make violence-related 
SAN tests until they’ve become inured to torturing others.  
In some cases, torture is a form of corporal punishment, meant to do nothing other than confer pain on the 
victim. Other times, torture is a means to extract information. While the victim may want to stay silent, the pain of 
torture (or even the promise of torture) can convince the victim to divulge what they know. 
When the victim wants to resist blabbering everything they know, they must attempt a Willpower Points × 3 test. 
On a success, the victim can say, or not say, whatever they want. For every turn of torture that the victim survives, 
they lose 1D4 WP in addition to any HP lost. The WP×3 test must be attempted after any turn of torture. 
If the WP roll is a fumble, the victim can’t help but tell the entire truth. A regular failure means that the victim 
must reveal one fact or detail, but they can choose what that is. A torturer who succeeds on an Insight test can 
tell when the truth is being told, and can choose to continue the torture even after the victim talks. 
 
 
Additional Combat Rules for Stone Age settings 
There’s a limited amount of variety in weaponry available during this era. Their usefulness in adventures may be limited, 
of course, depending on who or what the Protagonists face. 
The primary game statistics relating to different types of weapons may be found on the Example Weapons Table on 
page 18. The availability of any class of weapon will be dictated by the scarcity of weapon resources in the particular 
game setting (see preceding section). There are a wide variety of weapon variations throughout the Stone Age 
depending on culture and purpose.  
What follows are some spot rules for Protagonists who have access to common Stone Age weapons. 
Concealing Weapons 
Knives and daggers can be concealed under ordinary clothing. Someone deliberately looking for a concealed weapon can 
attempt an Alertness test to spot it. A larger spear or club means a +20% Alertness bonus. There is no way to conceal a 
large melee weapon. 

21 
Hand-to-Hand Weapons 
Unarmed attacks, like punching, kicking, and strangling, use the Unarmed Combat skill. All melee weapons use the 
Melee Weapons skill. 
Ranged Weapons 
Ranged weapons that are aimed (e.g., bow, and slings) use the Ranged Weapons skill. All require some kind of 
ammunition (arrows, bolts) and are useless if the supply is exhausted. Primitive weapons that are thrown (e.g., spears) 
use Athletics skill. 
Mounted Combat 
Ancient people used a variety of animals; typically, camels, elephants, or horses, as mounts. The earliest recorded 
instances of elephant and horse calvary date to around 1000 BCE during the Neolithic Era, but use of horses for 
mounted infantry may have occurred sooner.  
If a combatant on a mount attacks an enemy who is on foot, the height advantage of the attacker affords an advantage. 
All such attacks are made at +20%. Similarly, attempts made by mounted combatants to dodge or fight back against 
attackers on foot receive a bonus of +20%. These bonuses only apply if there is a significant height advantage (and don’t 
apply when a rider is attacking something much larger than human-sized). 
Note that whenever fighting from a mount, a combatant’s effective combat skill is the lesser of their Ride skill and their 
normal relevant combat skill. 
Shields and Parrying 
Combat in Stone Age settings is frequently up-close-and-personal, with opponents going toe-to-toe swinging, stabbing, 
striking and blocking. As such, the use of defensive measures such as parrying with weapons and blocking attacks with 
shields is common. Detailed but streamlined rules for handling extended melee fights is built into the basic rules for 
combat – see DEFENSE ROLLS in the SRD. Note that lengthy bouts of hand-to-hand combat can be particularly taxing, 
and combatants may become Exhausted and/or end the fight with severely depleted Willpower Points; this may affect 
their later actions. 
Weapon Materials 
Stone Age weapons are made from wood, bone, stone, and other natural materials. Items such as arrowheads, spear 
tips, knives, and axes are fragile and require a Luck test after use to see if the condition of the weapon has degraded to 
Junk (See PRE-LOVED ITEMS AND SPOILED GOODS in the SRD).   
 
 
 

22 
Equipment and Resources 
All localizations of Cthulhu Eternal use similar mechanics for assessing the success of Protagonists’ efforts to scrounge 
for scarce supplies or items, or attempt to solve problems by combining items with jury-rigging. The primary mechanical 
differences lie in the specific skills used. 
For Protagonists in Stone Age games: 
• Attempts to scrounge equipment/supplies from likely locations in the environment – tests against the Scavenge 
skill. 
• Attempts to jury-rig a contraption – tests against the Repair/Devise skill. 
Vehicles 
The table below provides some examples of the types of vehicles common to the Stone Age. 
>>A Note About Stone Age Vehicles 
Vehicles will be available in most Neolithic Era games, but only very simple  vehicles will be present in earlier times 
(marked with an asterisk in the table below).  
One of the earliest known vehicles was the Pesse Canoe, a dugout log dated to around 8040 BCE. The earliest 
examples of ships are the Khufu ship in Egypt starting approximately 2500 BCE. These vessels were approximately 
40 meters long and were rowed.  
The invention of the wheel dates to roughly 3400 BCE. Carts from this period could be pulled by people or 
animals. Prior to this, people would use sleds or sledges for transport. The first chariots date to c. 1950 BCE and 
were found in burial sites in modern day Russia. 
Speed 
When comparing Vehicles, there is a range of different vehicle speeds. A vehicle with a ‘Fast’ rating grants a +20% bonus 
to any Drive or Boating test to pursue or escape. A ‘Slow’ vehicle incurs a −20% penalty instead, while a ‘Very Slow’ 
vehicle attracts a −40% penalty. An ‘Average’ rating confers no modifier. 
A vehicle that’s notorious for poor handling or that’s in bad shape might counts as ‘heavily worn’ or ‘junk’ (see above) at 
the GM’s discretion. 
Some Example Vehicles 
>> Vehicles 
Vehicle Type Description Hit Points Armor Speed 
Litter* Flat platform with poles at each end; 
carried by 2—8 people 
8—10 1 Very 
Slow 
Travois, Horse-
Drawn* 
Light V- or X-shaped vehicles resembling a 
wheelbarrow without the wheel. Dragged 
across earth or sand like a sledge. 
10—12 2 Slow 
Travois, Man-
Drawn* 
Same as above but pulled by human 
motive force. 
10—12 2 Very 
Slow 
Cart, Man-Drawn Two-wheeled vehicle for cargo. Drawn by 
one or more people 
15—20 1 Very 
Slow 
Cart, Horse-Drawn Light vehicles intended to carry a single 
person, possibly with an out-rider 
15—20 2 Average 
Chariot Two-wheeled vehicle for travel or combat. 
Drawn by one or more horses. 
15—20 1 Fast 
Canoe A small watercraft intended to carry cargo 
or small groups of people 
15—20 2 Slow 
Khufu Ship Narrow boat used for cargo or transport 20—25 1 Slow 
* These very simple vehicle types might be found in any Stone Age era; the remainder will only typically be present in 
Neolithic eras 

23 
Sanity 
Most of the game mechanics surrounding Sanity do not vary between localizations of Cthulhu Eternal, however there 
are some small changes created through differences in available skills. 
• The main skill used by Stone Age characters attempting to cure a patient of their mental illness, is: Reassure. 
Disorders 
Although the ways in which the human mind responds to stresses and mental illness have not changed for centuries, the 
labels applied to mental disorders have varied from era to era. To keep the descriptions of mental disorders feeling 
“contemporary” to a given era, localizations define their own sets of disorders. For Stone Age games, the following set 
are recommended. 
Afeared Of … 
A common affliction arising from traumatic experiences is the development of an irrational fear of something related 
(directly or by association) with the incident. Whenever a Protagonist is in the presence of a trigger for his or her fear, he 
or she must make a SAN test (even if the trigger is not terrifying in any way to others). Failure means an acute episode 
has been triggered, during which there’s little choice but to suffer the Flee or Submit response to temporary insanity 
(see the SRD). A nearby box provides some examples of fears (what will be termed phobias in much later eras). 
>>Attributing the Causes of Mental Disorders 
Ancient societies attributed mental disorders to many causes mostly tied to their superstitious world view. Some 
cultures believed that mentally ill people were possessed by demonic entities or afflicted by the gods. Some 
believed such disorders arose from astrological or cosmic origins. It was not uncommon to think that such 
influences arose because of some kind of moral failing or as punishment for transgressing some kind of cultural 
norm, cosmic law, or ethical rule laid down by a divinity. 
While adopting such attributions may provide an element of verisimilitude to a game, it is important to check with 
players regarding their comfort with blanket rulings about the (perceived) origins of mental illness. Many players 
will have some personal or familial experiences relating to such topics and may find the reduction of mental illness 
to a “demonic possession” (or similar) to diminish them and thus be personally insulting or triggering. As with all 
gaming, there’s no right or wrong way and the best policy is to simply check with players beforehand.  
 
Amnesia 
This is a common disorder from encounters with the unnatural. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute 
episode, which erases all memory of the episode until your Protagonist finds a way to bring it back. 
Fearful Distrust 
A delusional state of extreme suspicion, in which a fear of invisible enemies pervades one’s world-view. Losing 2+ SAN in 
any single roll triggers an acute episode. Unless your Protagonist finds a way to stifle his or her delusions, he or she can’t 
trust or rely on anyone. Every event, every disagreement or source of suspicion is a clue to a conspiracy against the 
Protagonist. 
Great Sadness 
Acute sadness (what will later be termed depression) means total despair and a crushing inability to get anything done. 
It sometimes takes the shape of overwhelming guilt. An acute episode is triggered by reminders of past traumas your 
Protagonist suffered or inflicted, which can come in the most surprising forms and moments. During an acute episode, 
every skill or stat test costs 1D4 WP. 

24 
Hearing Voices 
From time to time your Protagonist experiences auditory hallucinations in which you hear voices which others cannot. 
Often these are running commentaries about your thoughts or actions, usually critical and derogatory. Any time you lose 
2+ SAN in any single roll, the voices return for 6+1D6 hours. You can try to hide it from those around you, but while in 
the grip of one of episodes you are very distracted and will automatically fail any Alertness or Search rolls and suffer a –
20% penalty to any other action requiring concentration. 
Mania 
Your Protagonist displays a euphoric and perhaps irritable mood that is consistently present. This may include frenzied 
activity for no obvious reason, uncharacteristic garrulousness, a random stream‐of‐consciousness flow of ideas, or 
difficulty sleeping. An acute episode is triggered whenever your Protagonist loses 2+ SAN in a single roll. During an acute 
episode all tasks which require concentration or fine control are at one‐fifth chance. 
Obsession 
Your Protagonist becomes fixated on some person, place, event, act, or idea. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an 
acute episode, which lasts days. In that time, any long-term action or skill use—anything taking more than a few hours—
is at −20% because your Protagonist’s mind is so often wrapped around its obsession. 
Plagued By Nightmares 
Your Protagonist feels exhausted all the time, barely able to get out of bed in the morning. It might be that some terribly 
traumatic encounter has left its scars upon them, or it may be just the accumulated stresses of a lifestyle with too much 
mental fatigue. But being bereft of energy does not equate to being well rested – in fact, your Protagonist sleeps poorly 
and is always waking to anxiety-inducing memories from the past. An acute episode is triggered by tangible reminders of 
past traumas your Protagonist suffered or inflicted. In an acute episode, the Game Moderator chooses one effect: your 
Protagonist either reacts violently to threats only the Protagonist perceives, or suffers an acute bout of melancholy. (See 
GREAT SADNESS nearby for details.) 
Reliant on [Intoxicant] 
Your Protagonist relies on some intoxicant or other (whatever is available in the setting) to get by. However much harm 
the compulsion causes, your Protagonist needs the relief it offers. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute 
episode, an overwhelming need. Feeding it usually imparts a −20% penalty to stats and skills for a few hours due to 
intoxication or distraction. And even in the best of times, going 24 hours without feeding the compulsion costs 1D6 WP 
and prevents your Protagonist from recovering any WP. Every further 24 hours costs 1D6 WP. At 2 or fewer WP, your 
Protagonist does irrational, self-destructive things to feed the compulsion. 
Self-Absorbed 
There are some whose certainty in their own pre-eminence knows no bound (today we would call them narcissists). 
Some people afflicted with this disorder see themselves as messiahs, or as exempt from ordinary morality. Losing 2+ 
SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode, in which every hint of doubt about your Protagonist’s superiority fills 
him or her with indignation. That causes every use of a stat or skill to get help or make a good impression to fail. 
Wander-Lust 
Literature is filled with examples of protagonists suffering a bout of madness and then wandering the wilderness for 
years until they’re cured and make a triumphant return to society. While wandering, they typically have no contact with 
humans and live a life akin to the beasts. 
If a Protagonist is afflicted with wander-lust, they are effectively out of the game for the duration of their wandering. 
Every game month the Protagonist wanders they attempt a Luck test. With success, the Protagonist returns to society 
cured of their disorder. If the Protagonist fails the Luck roll, they must wander another month, but have a flash of 
Insight, increasing a skill of their choice by +1D6 percentiles. 
 

25 
 
Fears 
• Afeared of heights 
• Afeared of open places 
• Afeared of cats 
• (for female Protagonists): Afeared of males 
• Afeared of bees 
• Afeared of spiders 
• Afeared of thunder, lightning and storms 
• Afeared of frogs and toads 
• Afeared of the deep sea 
• Afeared of plants 
• Afeared of reflections 
• Afeared of confined spaces 
• Afeared of crowds 
• Afeared of trees 
• Afeared of fur 
• Afeared of insects 
• (for male Protagonists): Afeared of females 
• Afeared of blood 
• Afeared of forests 
• Afeared of healers 
• Afeared of being alone 
• Afeared of dead things 
• Afeared of snakes 
• Afeared of fire 
• Afeared of darkness 
• Afeared of the sea 
• Afeared of hair 
• Afeared of foreigners 
• Afeared of animals 
 

26 
Open Gaming License v. 1.0a 
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (“Wizards”). All Rights Reserved. 
1. Definitions: (a) “Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b) “Derivative Material” means 
copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, 
upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to 
reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d) “Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes 
the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any 
additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative 
works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks 
including trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, 
likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, 
enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities 
or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product 
Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) “Trademark” means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor 
to identify itself or its products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using” means to use, 
Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of 
this agreement. 
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of 
this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by 
the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license 
with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your 
original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License. 
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open 
Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
of any original Open Game Content you Distribute. 
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, 
independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or 
Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of 
such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product 
Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content. 
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, 
modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License. 
10 Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute. 
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You have written permission from 
the Contributor to do so. 
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to 
statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected. 
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of 
the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License. 
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
Open Game License v. 1.0, © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
Legend, © 2011, Mongoose Publishing. 
Unearthed Arcana, © 2004, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
Delta Green: Agent’s Handbook, © 2016, Dennis Detwiller, Christopher Gunning, Shane Ivey, and Greg Stolze. 
Delta Green: Handler’s Guide, © 2017, Dennis Detwiller, Adam Scott Glancy, Kenneth Hite, Shane Ivey, and Greg Stolze. 
APOCTHULHU Quickstart, © 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Chad Bowser, Jo Kreil, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers. 
APOCTHULHU Core Rules © 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, Christopher Smith Adair, Fred 
Behrendt, Emily O’Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers. 
APOCTHULHU System Reference Document v0.666 © 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, 
Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O’Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers. 
Cthulhu Eternal System Reference Document v1.0 © 2021, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, 
Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O’Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers. 
Cthulhu Eternal – Stone Age Localization Cheat Sheet © 2026, Adam Alexander with John Shimmin 
PRODUCT IDENTITY: The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the Open Gaming License Version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and 
are not Open Game Content: The name “Cthulhu Eternal” and the Cthulhu Eternal logo. 
OPEN GAME CONTENT: The following items are hereby designated as Open Gaming Content under the terms of the Open Game License Version 1.0a, 
Section 1(d): all text, and tables are considered Open Content except for the name “Cthulhu Eternal”. If you would like to use the term “Cthulhu Eternal” 
within a product, please contact Cthulhu Reborn at inquiry@cthulhureborn.com to obtain written permission prior to publication. 